DESIGN.md, before:

# #! User Database -- Design document #

See <http://github.com/hashbang/userdb>

# About

This document describes the design of our PostgreSQL user database.

Understanding the design goals and requirements is an important part of
understanding the engineering trade-offs made there, so please read read
the [requirements](REQUIREMENTS.md) first.

# Design goals

This design leans strongly towards consistency of the data, enforced
as much as possible at the database level.

Part of this appears in the user of foreign keys, range or value constraints,
preventing applications from inserting (or modifying) data that violates those
constraints.

Less apparent manifestations appear in the design of the database schema:
- User's primary groups are known to have the same id and name as the users,
  and as such are not stored explicitely; such an inconsistency caused the
  [“group 3000” bug](https://github.com/hashbang/provisor/pull/25).
- Data duplication is systematically avoided, as it is a major cause of
  inconsistencies in databases; the schema is even in
  [project-join normal form](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fifth_normal_form).


# Replication

In a single-master deployment, PostgreSQL has hot replication features that
allow to immediately propagate changes to (a configurable number of) replicas,
possibly before the change is commited on the master.

Using a local PostgreSQL instance on each shell server, acting as a local replica,
immediately fulfills the availability requirements:
- each server holds a read-only copy of the database, so users can login
  regardless of whether the DB master is available;
- should the DB master be lost, the most up-to-date replica of the DB
  can be either promoted to the role of master, or (preferrably) copied
  to the new master instance.  The most recent instance can be
  discovered by comparing `pg_last_xlog_receive_location` values.

Moreover, single-master PostgreSQL provides the usual ACID consistency guarantees.


# Database schema

The database schema is provided in [`schema.sql`](schema.sql).

DB constraints are used to enforce, as much as possible, consistency.
For instance:
- uids must be valid and unique;
- usernames must be unique and follow the proper syntax rules;
- a user's host must exist.

User records have an optional `data` column, that can hold
  additional, non-relational data as a (binary-encoded) JSON object.

*NOTE:* Rows in `group` and `passwd` shouldn't share a `name`.
        Can this be expressed as a constraint?


# Data representation

In the `passwd` and `hosts` tables, a `data` (binary) JSON object holds
some non-relational data.  The rationale for this is two-fold:
- the `data` object can be easily extended with additional information
  without having to modify the schema (or even coordinate with the administrators);
- the `data` object can easily be passed across JSON-based APIs.

The `data` objects for [users](schemas/user_data.yml) and
[host](schemas/host_data.yml) must obey certain JSON schemata, for
several reasons:
- Some fields, like `shell` or `ssh_keys`, are used by #!
  infrastructure; validating the JSON objects prevents users from
  accidentally losing access to their own account in this way.
- The host `data` object is directly added to data that is exposed on
  a public API.  This avoids breaking the public API accidentally
  simply by changing the data.
- More generally, once a convention is widely adopted by #! users, it
  can be formalised into a JSON schema and enforced, making the data
  format of user records more interoperable.


*NOTE:* It might be possible to enforce the JSON Schema in the database
        itself. This isn't an immediate goal.

*NOTE:* Yes, I'm aware I serialized the JSON Schema as YAML.
        Yes, it's legit.


# Permissions

Moreso than separating permissions on a per-server basis, permissions
should be assigned on a per-service basis, and follow the least
privilege principle.


## Shell servers

A shell server hosts several components that get different access rights to the DB:
- `pgsql`: the DB server itself need a DB user with the `replication` privilege.
  It gives complete read access to the database (from the master), and nothing else.
- `ssh`: needs read access to the `passwd.{name,data}` columns.
- `nss`: needs read access to `passwd`, `group` and `aux_groups`.
- `hashbangctl`: needs write access to the `passwd.data` column.


## `hashbang.sh`

The website fulfills two complementary (and independent) roles:
- user creation: `INSERT` privilege in the `passwd` table;
- statistics: read-only access to a `hosts_stats` view, created as follows:

```postgres
CREATE VIEW hosts_stats AS
  SELECT hosts.id, hosts.name, agg.count FROM hosts
  JOIN (SELECT host, count(distinct id) as count FROM passwd GROUP BY host) AS agg
  ON agg.host = hosts.id
```


## `mail.hashbang.sh`

The mail server only needs read access to `passwd.{name,host}` and `hosts`.


# Service integration

## Shell servers

On the shell servers, integrating the new auth DB involves three things:
- having Postgres installed and configured for streaming replication;
- having `libnss-pgsql` configured as a NSS provider: this makes all
  users in the DB visible in the `getpwent(3)` functions family, making
  them “be there on the system”;
- having a script set as SSH `AuthorizedKeysCommand` that queries for a
  user's `passwd.data` and pipe it to `jq '.ssh_keys | .[]'`.


### `libnss-pgsql` configuration

The main part of the configuration of `libnss-pgsql` is to set the queries
used to retrieve information from the database.  Passwords are systematically
set to be `!`: this is a value that cannot possibly match any password hash
in `crypt(3)` format.

Extracting user information is fairly straightforward:

	# Returns (name, passwd, gecos, dir, shell, uid, gid) for a given name or uid, or all
	getpwnam = SELECT name, '!', data->>'name', homedir, data->>'shell', uid, uid FROM passwd WHERE name = $1
	getpwuid = SELECT name, '!', data->>'name', homedir, data->>'shell', uid, uid FROM passwd WHERE uid  = $1
	allusers = SELECT name, '!', data->>'name', homedir, data->>'shell', uid, uid FROM passwd


Retrieving group-related data is a bit harder, as there as two kinds of groups:
- a user's primary group shares the same name and id (and has a single user);
- an auxiliary group is described in the `group` table.

```
# Returns (name, passwd, gid) for a given name or gid, or all
getgrnam  = SELECT name, '!', gid FROM group  WHERE name = $1
      UNION SELECT name, '!', uid FROM passwd WHERE name = $1
getgrgid  = SELECT name, '!', gid FROM group  WHERE gid  = $1
      UNION SELECT name, '!', uid FROM passwd WHERE uid  = $1
allgroups = SELECT name, '!', gid FROM group
      UNION SELECT name, '!', uid FROM passwd
```

Finally, we need a query to link together users and auxiliary groups:

	# Returns all auxiliary group ids a user is a member of
	groups_dyn = SELECT gid FROM passwd JOIN aux_groups USING (uid) WHERE name = $1
	
	# Returns all uids belonging to a given group
	getgroupmembersbygid = SELECT name FROM passwd WHERE uid = $1
	                 UNION SELECT name FROM passwd JOIN aux_groups USING (uid) WHERE gid = $1


## `mail.hashbang.sh`

We can se directly Postfix's Postgres support to use a specific query as
a virtual table; `pgsql:/etc/postfix/pgsql-aliases.cf` can be specified
as `virtual_alias_map`.

The `pgsql-aliases.cf` config file itself would look like this:

	# The hosts that Postfix will try to connect to
	hosts = localhost
	
	# The user name and password to log into the pgsql server.
	user = someone
	password = some_password
	
	# The database name on the servers.
	dbname = userdb

	# Query the user's host and return user@host
	domain = hashbang.sh
	query = SELECT host FROM passwd WHERE name='%U'
	result_format = %U@%s

Commit message:

DESIGN: fixup: JSON schemas now enforced in DB

DESIGN.md, after:

# #! User Database -- Design document #

See <http://github.com/hashbang/userdb>

# About

This document describes the design of our PostgreSQL user database.

Understanding the design goals and requirements is an important part of
understanding the engineering trade-offs made there, so please read read
the [requirements](REQUIREMENTS.md) first.

# Design goals

This design leans strongly towards consistency of the data, enforced
as much as possible at the database level.

Part of this appears in the user of foreign keys, range or value constraints,
preventing applications from inserting (or modifying) data that violates those
constraints.

Less apparent manifestations appear in the design of the database schema:
- User's primary groups are known to have the same id and name as the users,
  and as such are not stored explicitely; such an inconsistency caused the
  [“group 3000” bug](https://github.com/hashbang/provisor/pull/25).
- Data duplication is systematically avoided, as it is a major cause of
  inconsistencies in databases; the schema is even in
  [project-join normal form](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fifth_normal_form).


# Replication

In a single-master deployment, PostgreSQL has hot replication features that
allow to immediately propagate changes to (a configurable number of) replicas,
possibly before the change is commited on the master.

Using a local PostgreSQL instance on each shell server, acting as a local replica,
immediately fulfills the availability requirements:
- each server holds a read-only copy of the database, so users can login
  regardless of whether the DB master is available;
- should the DB master be lost, the most up-to-date replica of the DB
  can be either promoted to the role of master, or (preferrably) copied
  to the new master instance.  The most recent instance can be
  discovered by comparing `pg_last_xlog_receive_location` values.

Moreover, single-master PostgreSQL provides the usual ACID consistency guarantees.


# Database schema

The database schema is provided in [`schema.sql`](schema.sql).

DB constraints are used to enforce, as much as possible, consistency.
For instance:
- uids must be valid and unique;
- usernames must be unique and follow the proper syntax rules;
- a user's host must exist.

User records have an optional `data` column, that can hold
  additional, non-relational data as a (binary-encoded) JSON object.

*NOTE:* Rows in `group` and `passwd` shouldn't share a `name`.
        Can this be expressed as a constraint?


# Data representation

In the `passwd` and `hosts` tables, a `data` (binary) JSON object holds
some non-relational data.  The rationale for this is two-fold:
- the `data` object can be easily extended with additional information
  without having to modify the schema (or even coordinate with the administrators);
- the `data` object can easily be passed across JSON-based APIs.

The `data` objects for [users](schemas/user_data.yml) and
[host](schemas/host_data.yml) must obey certain JSON schemata, for
several reasons:
- Some fields, like `shell` or `ssh_keys`, are used by #!
  infrastructure; validating the JSON objects prevents users from
  accidentally losing access to their own account in this way.
- The host `data` object is directly added to data that is exposed on
  a public API.  This avoids breaking the public API accidentally
  simply by changing the data.
- More generally, once a convention is widely adopted by #! users, it
  can be formalised into a JSON schema and enforced, making the data
  format of user records more interoperable.

Corresponding constraints (`data_host` and `data_user`) are generated
and added to the schema, using [postgres-json-schema] for validation.

*NOTE:* Yes, I'm aware I serialized the JSON Schema as YAML.
        Yes, it's legit.

[postgres-json-schema]: https://github.com/gavinwahl/postgres-json-schema


# Permissions

Moreso than separating permissions on a per-server basis, permissions
should be assigned on a per-service basis, and follow the least
privilege principle.


## Shell servers

A shell server hosts several components that get different access rights to the DB:
- `pgsql`: the DB server itself need a DB user with the `replication` privilege.
  It gives complete read access to the database (from the master), and nothing else.
- `ssh`: needs read access to the `passwd.{name,data}` columns.
- `nss`: needs read access to `passwd`, `group` and `aux_groups`.
- `hashbangctl`: needs write access to the `passwd.data` column.


## `hashbang.sh`

The website fulfills two complementary (and independent) roles:
- user creation: `INSERT` privilege in the `passwd` table;
- statistics: read-only access to a `hosts_stats` view, created as follows:

```postgres
CREATE VIEW hosts_stats AS
  SELECT hosts.id, hosts.name, agg.count FROM hosts
  JOIN (SELECT host, count(distinct id) as count FROM passwd GROUP BY host) AS agg
  ON agg.host = hosts.id
```


## `mail.hashbang.sh`

The mail server only needs read access to `passwd.{name,host}` and `hosts`.


# Service integration

## Shell servers

On the shell servers, integrating the new auth DB involves three things:
- having Postgres installed and configured for streaming replication;
- having `libnss-pgsql` configured as a NSS provider: this makes all
  users in the DB visible in the `getpwent(3)` functions family, making
  them “be there on the system”;
- having a script set as SSH `AuthorizedKeysCommand` that queries for a
  user's `passwd.data` and pipe it to `jq '.ssh_keys | .[]'`.


### `libnss-pgsql` configuration

The main part of the configuration of `libnss-pgsql` is to set the queries
used to retrieve information from the database.  Passwords are systematically
set to be `!`: this is a value that cannot possibly match any password hash
in `crypt(3)` format.

Extracting user information is fairly straightforward:

	# Returns (name, passwd, gecos, dir, shell, uid, gid) for a given name or uid, or all
	getpwnam = SELECT name, '!', data->>'name', homedir, data->>'shell', uid, uid FROM passwd WHERE name = $1
	getpwuid = SELECT name, '!', data->>'name', homedir, data->>'shell', uid, uid FROM passwd WHERE uid  = $1
	allusers = SELECT name, '!', data->>'name', homedir, data->>'shell', uid, uid FROM passwd


Retrieving group-related data is a bit harder, as there as two kinds of groups:
- a user's primary group shares the same name and id (and has a single user);
- an auxiliary group is described in the `group` table.

```
# Returns (name, passwd, gid) for a given name or gid, or all
getgrnam  = SELECT name, '!', gid FROM group  WHERE name = $1
      UNION SELECT name, '!', uid FROM passwd WHERE name = $1
getgrgid  = SELECT name, '!', gid FROM group  WHERE gid  = $1
      UNION SELECT name, '!', uid FROM passwd WHERE uid  = $1
allgroups = SELECT name, '!', gid FROM group
      UNION SELECT name, '!', uid FROM passwd
```

Finally, we need a query to link together users and auxiliary groups:

	# Returns all auxiliary group ids a user is a member of
	groups_dyn = SELECT gid FROM passwd JOIN aux_groups USING (uid) WHERE name = $1
	
	# Returns all uids belonging to a given group
	getgroupmembersbygid = SELECT name FROM passwd WHERE uid = $1
	                 UNION SELECT name FROM passwd JOIN aux_groups USING (uid) WHERE gid = $1


## `mail.hashbang.sh`

We can se directly Postfix's Postgres support to use a specific query as
a virtual table; `pgsql:/etc/postfix/pgsql-aliases.cf` can be specified
as `virtual_alias_map`.

The `pgsql-aliases.cf` config file itself would look like this:

	# The hosts that Postfix will try to connect to
	hosts = localhost
	
	# The user name and password to log into the pgsql server.
	user = someone
	password = some_password
	
	# The database name on the servers.
	dbname = userdb

	# Query the user's host and return user@host
	domain = hashbang.sh
	query = SELECT host FROM passwd WHERE name='%U'
	result_format = %U@%s
